---
title: Release Notes v0.3
version: "0.3"
headline: Release Notes
bodyclass: docs release-notes
date: 2016-04-20
---

# Spine 0.3

## CoreJvm

- Added SPI annotation to enable framework extension and replaceable components 
(implement a new storage, etc.).
- Added a requirement to mark entity protobuf state definitions with the `state_of` annotation.
- Added business Failures to distinguish from technical errors.
- Added Target ID as first required field in commands for entities.
- Removed file system storage implementation since JDBC storage can be used instead.
- Changed event and command IDs to be based on string UUID — previously they were composed of 
several fields, now they are part of Context.
- Added ClientService definition for establishing client connection, posting commands and receiving 
stream of events.
- Changed project module structure to: `client`, `server` and `values`.
- Added the default implementation of the `getDefaultState()` method to Entity.
- Added `CommandRouter` to Process Manager which allows creating and posting one or more commands in 
response to a command received by the ProcessManager.
- Added protobuf custom options for message validation ( for commands on posting).
- Added storage tests that can be used in different storage implementations.
- Added the ability to store the status of command processing to Command Store.
- Added the ability for Process Manager Repository to retrieve Process Manager ID from handled 
events and commands.
- Added integration with Java Code Coverage (JaCoCo).
- Added integration with Travis CI.
- Improved code coverage to 83%.
- Added the `getBuilder()` method for convenient updating of the Aggregate state in Event Appliers.
- Added the ability to schedule command delivery.

### Dependency Updates

- Updated to gRPC 2.11.
- Updated to protobuf 3.0.0 beta-2.
- Updated gradle to version 2.11.

### Documentation

- Added the first version of the Framework documentation on docs/spine3.org.

### Plugins:

- Updated to 1.3.2 version.
- Fixed Proto Lookup Plugin.
- Added Entity Lookup Plugin that searches commands for entities based on entity states marked 
with `state_of` annotation.
- Added Failures generation plugin.

### Storages Implementation

- Added jdbc storages implementation.
