---
title: Release Notes v0.4.1
version: "0.4.1"
headline: Release Notes
bodyclass: docs release-notes
date: 2016-06-07
---

# Spine 0.4.1

## Core Java

### Features & Improvements

- Starting from 0.4.1 version Spine supports integration events. An integration event is sent 
between loosely coupled parts of a system. `BoundedContext` now is `IntegrationEventSubscriber`
and it is possible to post integration events using `BoundedContext`.

- As events may have multiple subscribers that register and “listen” them, in the new release 
we renamed event handlers to event subscribers.

- Now you can use a `target version` attribute of the `CommandContext`. The attribute indicates 
a version of the entity for which this command is intended.

- The `context` parameter in event subscribers and command handlers used to be required in the 
previous versions of the framework. Now it is optional.

- The `ProjectionRepository` catch-up is now supported. So, once switched to the 0.4.1 version 
of the framework, you will be able to update projections from the event stream obtained from 
the `EventStore`.

- If you would like to gather statistics on errors and invalid commands, you can do so with the 
new release. Invalid and unsupported commands are stored with the error status to make further 
analysis.

- In this version, we interjected a wrapper that tames the inscrutable and continuously changing 
cloud application — the `ClientService` — facade for client apps. Create a `ClientService` using 
builder with multiple `BoundedContext`s and use it to post commands.

- This is fairly cool, we made `Storage`s multi-tenant! To make multi-tenancy obvious, use 
`TenantId` instead of `Namespace` for multi-tenancy support.

- When you are writing or rewriting an enterprise application, there are going to be parts of 
the system that facilitate the business but are not core to the business. For example, in most 
businesses there is a concept of tracking time. That is why we added a new type definition in 
Protobuf — `Work`. This type represents the amount of work done in minutes.

- Similarly to `Work` type, we added `URL` definition in the Protobuf. The `URL` can be defined 
in raw string form or as a structured parsed record. To support the new type there is 
a `QueryParameters` — the utility class, which helps to perform URL query parameters 
parsing and String conversion. And one more utility class — `Urls`, which simplifies 
working with `URL`. It provides all necessary operations, such as conversion and validation.

- To make current time obtaining more abstract and do not use the one from the Protobuf, you can 
publish the `testutil` project and add Provider interface.

Below let us list the issues that, however, no longer endanger your development process.

- We do care about all your events and do not want to lose them anymore. Therefore, we made 
Repositories post events that were produced as a result of the command dispatching and `CommandBus` 
to post events generated by command handlers.

- The automatic aggregate snapshots creation did not work as intended in the previous version. 
Now it is fixed.

- The server is restarted? This is not a reason to stop posting already scheduled commands. Now, 
if there are any scheduled commands found on the `CommandBus` startup, they are re-scheduled again.

- We thought you would enjoy the example of the `Aggregate` with all new features described. 
So, we fixed it and improved a bit.

### Dependency Updates

As always, we strive for the latest and greatest. With the new release we updated to:

- gRPC 0.14.0
- Protobuf 3.0.0 beta-3.
- Gradle 2.13.
