---
title: Release Notes v0.9.0
headline: Release Notes
bodyclass: docs release-notes
layout: release-notes
sidenav: release-notes-side-nav.html
date: Mar 3, 2017
---

# Spine 0.9.0

## Core Java

This version is a finalization of the framework API and most of the core features, that are 
scheduled for 1.0 release.

It also includes a lot of API polishing. Some of the changes are breaking, some are not.

The inner code structure (packaging, visibility of classes etc) has been modified significantly 
in order to follow the Onion architecture and become easier for understanding.

Below is a list of the most valuable changes and the references to the corresponding pull requests. 
More feature details are available upon the PR link.

- Multitenancy support. Please see `org.spine3.server.tenant` package for the details.

#### Client-side features:

- `ActorRequestFactory` is introduced as a single client-side utility to produce Commands, 
Queries and Topics: [#431]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/431).
- IDs now belong to `Command`, `Event` and `Failure`, not to their 
contexts: [#450]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/450), [#452]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/452).
- An ability to define the custom `Command` attributes is introduced to the public 
API ([#448]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/448)). Also, `Command` now has the system-only properties 
hidden from the public access ([#455]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/455)).
- `ActorContext` is now a unified context, reflecting the properties of an environment, 
where a `Command`, `Query` or `Topic` instance is created.
- Fail-fast `Command` creation is available via `ValidatingBuilder`s. They are automatically 
generated for each `Command` and serve to validate the field values while building `Command` 
messages.
- `Stand` input parameters are now validated according to the Protobuf annotations set for 
the requests: [#437]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/437).

#### Server-side changes:

- It is now possible to `@Subscribe` to Failures: [#362]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/362), [#299]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/299).
- `FailureThrowable` API simplification: [#454]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/454).
- Entity lifecycle:
    - repository views for “archived” and “deleted” items;
    - lifecycle flags: [#294]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/294), [#352]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/352), [#371]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/371), [#372]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/372).
- Improvements to entity versioning: [#346]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/346).
- `AggregatePart` and `AggregateRoot` API improvements: [#347]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/347).
- Changes to `Command` dispatchers and handlers: [#354]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/354), [#358]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/358).
- Simpler routing of commands for Process Managers: [#313]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/313).
- `StorageFactory` is made more configurable for different environments. In particular, it is now 
easier to provide different Storage implementations for testing and production deployment 
cases: [#289]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/289), [#290]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/290).

    It is now possible to store some of Entity fields separately to allow the further efficient 
    querying: [#398]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/398).
- `CommandStore` and `EventStorage` are now Repositories, based upon `RecordStorage`: [#394]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/394), [#395]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/395).

#### Utilities:

- `StringifierRegistry` is introduced to organize and simplify string-to-object and object-to-string 
conversion for Entity state objects and other user-defined types: 
[#389]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/389), 
[#382]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/382), 
[#383]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/383), 
[#378]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/378), 
[#423]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/423), 
[#436]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/436).
- Improvements to Date/Time API: [#387]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/387).

Lots of less valuable changes were made as well, including performance improvements, extended 
configurability of the framework building blocks, more helper utilities and object factories 
for testing.

#### Version updates:

- gRPC 1.1.2 ([#341]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/341)).
- Gradle 3.5.

#### New test dependencies:

- Guava-testlib.
