---
title: Release Notes v1.8.0
headline: Release Notes
bodyclass: docs release-notes
layout: release-notes
sidenav: release-notes-side-nav.html
date: Dec 20, 2021
---

# Spine 1.8.0

## Base

This is a release of Spine `base` modules, which supports the new features in the upcoming 1.8.0 
release of Spine's `core-java` modules.

## Core Java

This release brings numerous fixes, updates to API and performance improvements.

#### Breaking Changes

- Instead of `NodeId`, `ShardSessionRecord` now uses `WorkerId` to indicate 
who is currently processing which shard.

  Thus, all shard processing sessions should be completed before the migration.

  Please see [#1433]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1433) for details.

#### API Changes

- Made `BlackBoxContext` implement `Closeable` (as addition of [#1402]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1402)).

- `BlackBoxContext` API has been extended to provide an instance of `Client` linked to the 
context under the test.

  It makes possible to use `Client` in tests, for example:

   ```java
   BlackBoxContext context = BlackBoxContext.from(...);
   ClientRequest clientRequest = context.client().asGuest();
   
   assertThat(clientRequest.select(ProjectView.class).run())
           .hasSize(0);
   clientRequest.command(createProject()).postAndForget();
   assertThat(clientRequest.select(ProjectView.class).run())
           .hasSize(1);
   ```

  Please note, that provided `Client` would inherit `TenantId` from `BlackBoxContext`, 
but would NOT inherit `UserId` and `ZoneId`.

  Check [#1407]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1407) for details.

- Made API calls for the conditional settings of `ServerEnvironment` "lazy".

  Previously, ServerEnvironment provided two kinds of API calls for the conditional settings:

   ```java
    ServerEnvironment.when(Staging.class)
                     // This call is handy when `myStorageFactory` is already available.
                     .use(myStorageFactory)

    ServerEnvironment.when(PreProduction.class)
                     // And this one looks lazy, so that it is only executed when and _if_ requested.
                     .use((env) -> createMySqlStorage())
   ```

  However, in fact, there was no "lazy" behavior, which caused numerous workarounds to actually 
  postpone the initialization of environment-specific settings until they start to make sense.

  This release addresses the issue by making the behavior truly "lazy" 
(see [#1421]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1421)).

#### Fixes

- Enabled `IntegrationBroker` dispatch events regardless of registration order of subscribing 
and publishing Bounded Contexts (see [#1402]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1402)).

- Transformation of an Entity's state during `Migration` has been changed so that the `newState` 
completely overwrites the old one within the migration transaction 
(see [#1405]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1405)).

- The internals of `IntegrationBroker` were made more thread-safe 
(see [#1423]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1423)).

- `SubscriptionService` now properly locates the Bounded Context when subscribing to events 
produced by standalone producers, such as descendants of `AbstractCommandHandler` or 
`AbstractEventReactor` (see [#1423]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1423)).

#### Performance

- Improved Catch-up caching (see [#1406]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1406) for details).

## JDBC Storage

This is a public release of Spine libraries providing the `Storage` implementations
for JDBC-compatible DB engines.

It supports all the features [recently introduced]({{site.core_java_repo}}/releases/tag/v1.8.0)
in the corresponding `core-java:1.8.0` release.

### Migration

Due to the changes introduces in [core-java#1433]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1433),
the structure of `shard_session_registry` table was changed. `NODE_ID` field should be renamed
to `WORKER_ID`. The field type remains the same.

It is also recommended to remove all `shard_session_registry` entries before migration.

### Fixes

* The reported `DbIterator` issue was resolved. Previously, in some corner cases,
  it was breaking the read operations for Aggregates. See #155 for more details.

## Google Cloud Java
This is another public release of Spine libraries which streamline the development 
of apps running under GCP.

It supports all the features [recently introduced]({{site.core_java_repo}}/releases/tag/v1.8.0) 
in the corresponding `core-java:1.8.0` release.

**Migration**

In order to support the API change introduced in [core-java#1433]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1433), 
the `datastore` library updates the storage schema. Instead of the `ShardSessionRecord.node` field, 
`ShardSessionRecord.worker` field is now used.

`ShardSessionRecord`s are short-lived by their nature, so the simplest migration strategy would be 
to pause or stop the application instances, drop all remaining `ShardSessionRecord`s and migrate 
the traffic to the updated version of the application.

Special attention should be paid to the Datastore indexes, which previously could be created in 
the applications built on top of Spine `datastore` library. In case `ShardSessionRecord.node` 
was included into any indexes, it might be a good idea to include `ShardSessionRecord.worker` 
field instead.

## Web

This is a public release of Spine `web` libraries, which support all the features 
[recently introduced]({{site.core_java_repo}}/releases/tag/v1.8.0) 
in the corresponding `core-java:1.8.0` release.

## Time

This is another public release of Spine `time` library.

While it brings no particular features or fixes itself, this artifact serves to support the 
general release of all Spine libraries in version `1.8.0`.
