---
title: Release Notes v1.5.0
headline: Release Notes
bodyclass: docs release-notes
layout: release-notes
sidenav: release-notes-side-nav.html
date: Mar 8, 2020
---

# Spine 1.5.0

## Core Java

This major update of the library brings a number of new features and performance improvements.

- Projections now support an automated run-time catch-up ([#1221]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1221)).
- The client API was made less error-prone by enforcing the strong typing for the columns and 
properties of Entities and Events. The list of the model fields is generated as Java code by the 
Spine compiler at build-time ([#1229]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1229), [#1246]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1246)).
- A data migration API is now available for `ProcessManagers` and `Projections`. It automates the 
process of updating the existing data upon the changes in the domain model  ([#1241]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1241)).
- The logging records made from within the Entity handlers now print the full signature of the 
called method ([#1242]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1242)).
- It is now possible to specify an actor when composing a test scenario with `BlackBoxBoundedContext` 
API ([#1242]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1242)).
- `CommandBus` is no longer responsible for validating the first field of the transmitted 
`Command`s; instead, this is a job of the `Repository` for the target `Entity` ([#1245]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1245)).

The API of `InboxMessage` has been changed so that any of the existing `InboxMessages` become 
incompatible ([#1239]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1239)). Please make sure to deliver the messages 
from all of your production `Inbox`es prior to updating to the new version.

Also, a number of minor improvements and issues were addressed. Please see the list of closed pull 
requests for more details.


## Base

This release includes numerous API updates and performance improvements.

The most noticeable are listed below.

- `Time.currentTime()` now returns the time with microsecond precision. The values are emulated, 
increasing for each consequent call ([#504]({{site.base_repo}}/pull/504), [#512]({{site.base_repo}}/pull/512)).
- `(constraint_for)` is now supported by the Spine compiler ([#505]({{site.base_repo}}/pull/505)).
- Support for the new Column API has been added to the Spine compiler ([#508]({{site.base_repo}}/pull/508)).
- Logging API has been extended ([#513]({{site.base_repo}}/pull/513)).

For more details please navigate to the list of the closed pull requests and their descriptions.


## Bootstrap

This release brings the support of Spine components in version 1.5.0.


## Web

This release of the `web` library brings the support of the API and data structures introduced 
in `core-java` v. 1.5.0.


## JDBC Storage

This release brings the support of the latest features introduced in the framework.


## Google Cloud Java
This release brings the support of the latest features introduced in the framework.


## Time
This is another public release of the `time` library.


## Money

This release publishes the library artifacts as compatible with the Spine framework in version 1.5.0.
