---
title: Release Notes v1.0.0
headline: Release Notes
bodyclass: docs release-notes
layout: release-notes
sidenav: release-notes-side-nav.html
date: Aug 5, 2019
---

# Spine 1.0.0

<p class="lead">This is the first public release of Spine core modules.</p>

## Most notable changes:

- `ServerEnvironment` is now responsible for the configuration of the server-wide routines, such 
as `StorageFactory`, `TransportFactory` and `Delivery`.
- System Bounded Context is now configurable. It was simplified and made less intrusive.
- Entities now receive messages via `Inbox`, which supports message sharding and de-duplication 
in a multi-node environment.
- Trace API was introduced.
- Errors during the message dispatching no longer throw exceptions. A series of system events 
was introduced instead.
- `ConstraintViolated` system event was introduced.
- `BoundedContext` configuration was simplified. Also, `BoundedContextBuilder` is now the only API 
to set up the context; all the duplicating API calls were removed from the `BoundedContext` itself.
- It is now possible to `@Command` upon external events. `@Command` methods which accept events, 
may now ignore them.
- `BlackBoxBoundedContext` API was extended with an ability to assert `Query` and `Subscription` 
behavior by using the corresponding test subjects.
- `BlackBoxBoundedContext` API is now the only way to test the applications built with Spine. 
The previous unit-testing framework was removed.
- Entity `@Column` API marked as `@Experimental`, as we can still see a room for API improvement 
and further changes.
- `IntegrationBus` behavior on handling new `BoundedContext`s was fixed.
- Previously deprecated API was removed.

Also, we created a chat on [Gitter](https://gitter.im/{{ site.gitter_username }}) for answering 
the questions on the framework use. Please feel free to join and say hi!
