---
title: Release Notes v1.3.0
headline: Release Notes
bodyclass: docs release-notes
layout: release-notes
sidenav: release-notes-side-nav.html
date: Dec 17, 2019
---

# Spine 1.3.0

## Core Java
This release includes several API improvements for the library, as well as some new features.

#### Notable changes:

- The new high-level client API is introduced ([#1186]({{site.core_java_repo}}pull/1186)).
- Rejection classes can now be properly subscribed to ([#1193]({{site.core_java_repo}}pull/1193))
- Several multi-threading tweaks are applied to improve the delivery process ([#1200]({{site.core_java_repo}}pull/1200)).
- The `AggregateHistoryCorrupted` event is added. It signals to the user that the aggregate state 
has become invalid and the aggregate cannot handle any more incoming signals ([#1199]({{site.core_java_repo}}pull/1199)).
- It's now allowed to subscribe to the same rejection type multiple times with the different causes ([#1205]({{site.core_java_repo}}pull/1205)).
- The subscription topic is now additionally validated on the client to fail fast on invalid topic 
creation ([#1197]({{site.core_java_repo}}pull/1197)).
- The `spine.core.Version` can now be specified in the ordering filters for queries and subscriptions ([#1198]({{site.core_java_repo}}pull/1198)).
- The `BlackBoxBoundedContext`-based tests now have a `DiagnosticLog` which logs all received diagnostic 
events with a meaningful message ([#1209]({{site.core_java_repo}}pull/1209)).
- The `CannotDispatchDuplicateEvent` and `CannotDispatchDuplicateCommand` now provide the type of 
the duplicate signal ([#1209]({{site.core_java_repo}}pull/1209)).
- A lot of third-party dependencies are updated to the newer version ([#1195]({{site.core_java_repo}}pull/1195)).

## Base
This PR brings several API improvements to the library.

#### Notable changes:

- A `KnownMessage` interface is introduced. It marks the messages that are generated with Spine Model Compiler and can provide their `typeUrl()` ([#495]({{site.base_repo}}pull/495)).
- The deprecated `FieldPaths` utility is now removed ([#495]({{site.base_repo}}pull/495)).
- A lot of third-party dependencies are updated to the newer version ([#496]({{site.base_repo}}pull/496)).
- The conversion routines in `TypeConverter` will now support the number-based `EnumValue` instances ([#501]({{site.base_repo}}pull/501)).

## Bootstrap
A public release of Spine Bootstrap plugin.

## Web
A public release of the Spine Web library.

In this release, the client API got a revamp to simplify calls and provide all the features that 
the Java client provides. See [#125]({{site.web_repo}}pull/125), [#127]({{site.web_repo}}pull/127).

## JDBC Storage
A public release of the library.

## Google Cloud Java
A public release of the Datastore-related Spine libraries.

## Time
A public release of Spine Time library.
