---
title: Release Notes v1.6.0
version: "1.6.0"
headline: Release Notes
bodyclass: docs release-notes
date: 2020-09-14
---

# Spine 1.6.0

This release brings numerous API improvements, as well as fixes and infrastructure updates 
to the framework.

## Base

### API changes

#### Execution environment

1. Custom environments support is introduced [[#539]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/539), 
[#542]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/542), [#545]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/545)].

    The `Environment` now exposes API to register user-defined environment types.
    This can be done by extending the `EnvironmentType` class:
    
    ```java
    public final class AwsLambda extends EnvironmentType {
    
        @Override
        public boolean enabled() {
            // ...
        }
    }
    ```
   
    Then, the environment can be registered to give the user ability to check if it's active at 
    any given moment of time:
    
    ```java
    Environment.instance()
               .register(new AwsLambda());
    
    // ...
    
    if (Environment.instance().is(AwsLambda.class)) {
        this.sender = new AwsEmailSender();
    }
    ```
   
    The Spine framework provides two environments out of the box: `Production` and `Tests`.

1. The `io.spine.testing` package is added to the list of known testing libraries. When it occurs 
in the class path, the environment will always be resolved to 
`Tests` [[#544]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/544)].

#### Protobuf Model definition

1. `(min)`, `(max)` and `(range)` constraints will now be verified to be the whole numbers when 
applied to a whole number field (`int32`, etc.) [[#560]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/560)].

1. `(is)` and `(every_is)` options will now be applied simultaneously instead of `(is)` taking 
priority over `(every_is)` [[#531]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/531)].

1. New tools are added for working with regex-es in Protobuf [[#520]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/520)].

1. An `(is_required)` validation option is added for `oneof` group fields 
[[#523]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/523)].

1. The `spine.ui.Language` enumeration is now defined and contains language codes defined by 
ISO 639-1 [[#522]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/522)].

#### Other

JSON parser will now ignore unknown fields, allowing easier data migrations between old/new 
Protobuf schemas [[#518]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/518)].

### Fixes

1. The Spine `protoc` plugin location process is simplified. This enables creation of 
[composite builds](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/composite_builds.html) for 
Spine-based projects [[#559]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/559)].

1. `Time` is tweaked to provide identical behaviour on all platforms under Java 8 and 
Java 9+ [[#554]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/554)].

1. The proper import resolution is implemented for the Dart client 
[[#524]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/524)].

1. `javax.annotations-api` dependency is added to the project so the Spine `protoc` plugin can 
be run safely with Java 11 [[#546]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/546)].

### Infrastructure

1. Stricter Gradle task ordering is introduced to eliminate randomness in build execution and 
improve the process reliability [[#562]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/562)].

1. The project build scripts are migrated to Kotlin 
[[#532]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/532), [#534]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/534)].


## Core Java

### API changes

#### Client

1. The ability to `postAndForget()` a command is added to the `Client`. This method should be 
called when the user does not care about events/rejections produced by a command.
   
   The previously used `post()` method is reserved for cases when one or more event types are 
   actually observed by the client. The value returned by `post()` can no longer be 
   ignored [[#1292]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1292)].

1. Event subscriptions are now more flexible, allowing to subscribe to events produced by 
non-entity objects (e.g. `AbstractEventReactor`) as well as events not explicitly declared 
in any `BoundedContext` [[#1258]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1258)].

1. The `Client` is extended with methods to handle streaming and server errors when executing 
requests [[#1270]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1270)].

#### Server

1. The custom environments support is introduced [[#1274]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1274), 
[#1293]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1293)].

   The `Environment` now exposes API to register user-defined environment types and to determine 
   which one is enabled at any given moment of time. See the 
   [release notes]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/565) of `base`.
    
   The `ServerEnvironment` allows to configure environment-dependent values, as follows:
    
   ```java
   StorageFactory factory = InMemoryStorageFactory.newInstance();
   ServerEnvironment.instance()
                    .use(factory, Tests.class);
   ```
   
   The Spine framework provides two environments out of the box: `Production` and `Tests`.
   
1. **Breaking change:** Most of the `@Internal` methods of `BoundedContext` moved to its internal 
class `InternalAccess` instance of which is available via the `internalAccess()` method.

   The method is available only to the server-side framework code.
   
1. Delivery API is extended with a factory method which allows to create asynchronous version of 
local `Delivery` [[#1265]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1265)].

1. The `Pair` can now be created from an already existing `Optional` 
[[#1296]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1296)].

1. The proper support to the `CommandBus` filters which throw rejections is added 
[[#1295]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1295)].

#### Model

1. The `@External` annotation is introduced to mark the handler method parameters of an external 
origin. It replaces the previously used for this purpose `(external = true)` attribute of 
`@Subscribe`, `@React`, and `@Command` annotation. The attribute is deprecated 
[[#1269]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1269)].

1. `(set_once)` constraint in entity states is no longer ignored 
[[#1268]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1268)].

1. `@ByField` is deprecated in favour of `@Where` [[#1270]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1270)].

#### Logging

1. The `DiagnosticLog` messages are made more detailed [[#1262]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1262)].

1. The standard framework exceptions are expanded with more info 
[[#1255]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1255)].

#### Testing

Various quality-of-life changes are introduced for the testing API.

See [#1249]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1249), [#1251]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1251), 
[#1252]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1252), and [#1261]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1261) 
for details.

Some of the testing API changes are breaking. They include:

1. BlackBoxBoundedContext is renamed to `BlackBoxContext`.
1. Outdated `Verify`-based API is removed.
1. `BlackBoxContext` no longer exposes `eventBus()` and `commandBus()`.
1. The `BlackBoxContext.subscribeTo(Topic)` semantics changed. See 
[#1249]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1249).
1. Simplified combinations of `UserId` and `ZoneId` parameters of `BlackBoxContext`.

### Fixes

The `Migration` logic is fixed to properly support entity state updates 
[[#1298]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1298)].

### Infrastructure

The project build scripts are migrated to Kotlin [[#1278]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1278)].   
   
## Bootstrap

With this release the `bootstrap` plugin receives support for more automated project 
configurations [[#65]({{% get-site-data "spine.bootstrap_repo" %}}/pull/65)].

### Library dependencies

It's now possible to add some of the Spine libraries to project dependencies through the API 
provided by the plugin. This includes:

- the Google Cloud Datastore storage implementation:
    ```java
    spine.enableJava {
        withDatastore()
    }
    ```
  
- web API library:
    ```java
    spine.enableJava().webServer()
    ```
  
- web library with integration over the Firebase Realtime Database:
    ```java
    spine.enableJava().firebaseWebServer()
    ```

### IDEA configuration

If both Bootstrap and the `idea` plugin are applied, Bootstrap configures the `idea` plugin, so 
that the IDE displays sources and generated sources as expected.

### Infrastructure

The project build scripts are migrated to Kotlin [[#50]({{% get-site-data "spine.bootstrap_repo" %}}/pull/50)].

## Web

### API changes

1. The JS Client now supports multitenancy [[#141]({{% get-site-data "spine.web_repo" %}}/pull/141)].

    The `Client` factory API now accepts a `TenantProvider` as an element of the passed client 
    options.
    
    The `TenantProvider` defines the current tenant ID to be used for all requests done with the 
    client. The current tenant ID can be dynamically updated with the help of 
    `TenantProvider.update(tenantId)`. For single-tenant applications, the `TenantProvider` can 
    be omitted in the options.
    
    Multitenant client usage example:
   
    ```java
    let tenantProvider = new TenantProvider(initialTenantId());
    let client = spineWeb.init({
    		protoIndexFiles: [protoIndex],
     		endpointUrl: endpointUrl,
     		firebaseDatabase: firebaseDatabase,
      		actorProvider: new ActorProvider(),
      		tenantProvider: tenantProvider
    	});
    // …
    tenantProvider.update(newTenantId());
    ```

1. The `FirebaseCredentials` are now constructed from `GoogleCrendetials` rather than the 
deprecated `GoogleCredential`. The factory method accepting `GoogleCredential` is 
deprecated [[#137]({{% get-site-data "spine.web_repo" %}}/pull/137)].

1. The `onRejection` callback of `CommandRequest` is renamed to `onImmediateRejection` to better 
reflect its purpose [[#151]({{% get-site-data "spine.web_repo" %}}/pull/151)]. See also the corresponding 
[changes]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1295) in core-java.

### Infrastructure

1. The JS client docs are now published to [spine.io](https://spine.io/) 
[[#136]({{% get-site-data "spine.web_repo" %}}/pull/136)].

1. The project build scripts are migrated to Kotlin [[#142]({{% get-site-data "spine.web_repo" %}}/pull/142)].


## Google Cloud Java

A public release of Datastore-related Spine libraries.

### Notable changes

1. The definition of Pub/Sub push request message is added 
[[#150]({{% get-site-data "spine.gcloud_java_repo" %}}/pull/150)].
    
    It can be used for endpoints that are used with Pub/Sub `push` subscriptions in order to 
    easily transform incoming JSON data into a respective Protobuf definitions.

1. The project build scripts are migrated to Kotlin [[#148]({{% get-site-data "spine.gcloud_java_repo" %}}/pull/148)].


## JDBC Storage

A public release of Spine library supporting the JDBC-compliant storage engines.

The library as of now is still in the [experimental]({{% get-site-data "spine.jdbc_storage_repo" %}}/pull/149) status.

### Infrastructure

The project build scripts are migrated to Kotlin [[#148]({{% get-site-data "spine.jdbc_storage_repo" %}}/pull/148)].


## Time

A public release of Spine `time` library.
