---
title: Release Notes v0.8.0
version: "0.8.0"
headline: Release Notes
bodyclass: docs release-notes
date: 2017-01-31
---

# Spine 0.8.0

## CoreJvm

The update 0.8.0 is aimed to extend and polish the existing framework API, making the code less 
repetitive and more testable. We also tried to handle the most common scenarios to reduce the 
number of boilerplate code in applications built on top of Spine.

### `Aggregate` API is extended

As learned from the real-world examples, sometimes the domain rules expressed within an `Aggregate` 
can become an overwhelming responsibility for a single class. That’s why `AggregatePart` and 
`AggregateRoot` abstractions are introduced to represent a large `Aggregate` as a set of smaller 
objects.

Such an approach also allows to access different parts of a composite Aggregate separately, 
improving the system performance.

Please see `org.spine3.server.aggregate` package for more details.

### Improvements in the testing framework

To help building the unit tests faster and do not bother with the boilerplate code, new testing 
routines were introduced to `org.spine3.test` package. The improvements include:

- easier testing of the commands and the entities which handle commands,
- helpers for quick creation of `Aggregate`, `AggregatePart`, `Projection`, `ProcessManager` 
and `Entity` instances,
- routines for nullability checks.

### Repackaging of Storage implementations

Storage classes were moved to the same classes as related Protobuf types. Some of the methods 
were demoted from `public` to `protected` in order to make the API more clear.

Generated classes and interfaces are now available under storage sub-packages, and these 
packages are annotated as `@SPI` via `package-info.java`.

### Public API improvements and changes

#### `StorageFactorySwitch` introduced

As of now it is possible to provide different `StorageFactory` implementations for production and 
testing modes in a unified way, taking care of the environment outside of the business and test 
logic.

The `Supplier` interface contract is used to allow lazy initialisation of the `StorageFactory` 
instances and improve the app startup performance:

```java
final Supplier<StorageFactory> productionSupplier = ...;
final Supplier<StorageFactory> testingSupplier = ...;
// ...
StorageFactorySwitch.init(productionSupplier, testingSupplier).
```

#### `BoundedContext` contract changes

`StorageFactory` for a BoundedContext is now provided via lazy-init `Supplier` to speed up the 
context instantiation.

The `BoundedContext.Builder` API no longer requires `StorageFactory` instance. If it not set 
explicitly, the current `StorageFactorySwitch` value is used. So it’s now possible to create an 
instance as simple as

```java
// Using the `StorageFactorySwitch` default.
final BoundedContext context = BoundedContext.newBuilder().build();
```

And one more change is made. Now the `BoundedContext` class made final to clearly state it is not 
designed for subclassing.

#### `EventEnricher` and `EventStore` configuration moved from `BoundedContext` to `EventBus`

In order to make the configuration more logical and avoid potential cross-dependencies, the 
configuration of the items used by the `EventBus` is now available via the `EventBus.Builder`, 
not via the `BoundedContext.Builder`:

```java
// Spine 0.7.0:
BoundedContext.newBuilder()
              .setEventStore(customEventStore)
              .setEnricher(customEnricher)
              //… 
              .build();

// Spine 0.8.0:
final EventBus eventBus = EventBus.newBuilder()
                                  .setEventStore(customEventStore)
                                  .setEnricher(customEnricher)
                                  // …
                                  .build();
BoundedContext.newBuilder()
              .setEventBus(eventBus)
              // …
              .build();
```

#### More flexibility in event dispatching

A single `Event` can now be delivered to multiple dispatchers of the same type at once.

For instance, each projection repository can be configured to route the same incoming SomeEvent 
instance to a number of projections, managed by this repo. In this case each of the projection 
instances will receive exactly the same `SomeEvent` instance.

It is also possible to ignore the incoming `Event` by returning an empty set of target projection 
IDs. That may become handy to reflect a certain conditional behaviour of the read side.

This feature is available for both `ProcessManagerRepository` and `ProjectionRepository`. 
See `EventDispatchingRepository.addIdSetFunction` for details.

#### Dynamic configuration of the event enrichment process

Previously the `EventEnricher` must have been fully initialized by the moment of the `BoundedContext` 
creation. That made it hard to use the `AggregateRepository` instances in the enrichment functions, 
since `AggregateRepository` required the `BoundedContext`. There was a circular dependency:

`EventEnricher` (wants to use) —> `AggregateRepo` (requires) —> `BoundedContext` (requires) 
—> `EventEnricher`.

In order to break the circle, it is made possible to add the new enrichment functions at runtime:

```
boundedContext.getEventBus().addFieldEnrichment(...)
```

#### Event enrichment features

It is now possible to specify the whole package as a target for enrichment:

```proto
message EnrichmentForAllEventsInPackage {
     option (enrichment_for) = "com.foo.bar.*";
     ...
}
```

**OR** syntax became available in scope of `by` option. It is useful when the same enrichment is 
required for several events, but the anchor fields have different names:

```proto
package com.foo.bar;
// ...
message EventOne {
    UserId user_id = 1;
}

message EventTwo {
     UserId author_id = 1;
}

// …

message MyEnrichmentForEventOneAndTwo {
     option (enrichment_for) = "com.foo.bar.*"

     string name = 1 [(by) = "*.user_id | *.author_id"]
}
```

#### Postponed delivery of `Events` to the subscribers and dispatchers

It is now possible to define how and when the `Event` instances are delivered to their destinations. 
In particular, the event propagation can be postponed until the system performance allows to 
continue it.

It is especially handy for the cloud environments such as Google AppEngine. A custom strategy at 
a certain app node may be implemented to speed up the command propagation with no need to wait 
until the read-side becomes fully consistent. That allows to handle the incoming requests blazingly 
fast and thus scale better.

See `setDispatcherEventDelivery` and `setSubscriberEventDelivery` methods of `EventBus.Builder`.

#### Postponed delivery of Entity updates to Stand

In addition to the customisable `Event` delivery strategy, the same feature is available for 
`Entity` updates delivered to the `Stand` instance. Effective on per-`BoundedContext` basis, 
the behaviour can be set via `BoundedContext.Builder.setStandUpdateDelivery`. 
See `StandUpdateDelivery` documentation for details.

#### `Valid` option changes

`Valid` option has been simplified and is now a `bool` instead of `Message`.

```proto
// Spine 0.7.0:
MyMessage field = 1[(valid).value = true]

// Spine 0.8.0:
MyMessage field = 1[(valid) = true]
```

#### `EntityRepository` has been renamed to `RecordBasedRepository`

This is done to reflect the class nature better.

### Various improvements and fixes

- `UnexpectedTypeException` is thrown in response to packing/unpacking the Protobuf values 
instead of plain `RuntimeException` as previously.
- Issue [#255]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/issues/255) fixed: return `Optional` on `load()` in 
`Repository` instances.
- `Identifiers` utility class has been refactored, with a object-to-String conversion routines 
split into the separate `Stringifiers` utility class.
- `Mismatches` improvements: handle the case when a command expects some value and wants to 
change it, but discovers a default Protobuf `Message` value.
- The recommended visibility level for the command handler methods was changed to `default` to make 
the `Aggregate` API cleaner.
- A utility `Tests.hasPrivateUtilityConstructor()` method has been renamed to 
`Tests.hasPrivateParameterlessCtor()` to better reflect broader usage.

### Dependency updates:

- Gradle 3.3.
