---
title: Release Notes v1.0.0-pre7
version: "1.0.0-pre7"
headline: Release Notes
bodyclass: docs release-notes
date: 2019-05-03
---

# Spine 1.0.0-pre7

## CoreJvm

#### API Changes in Core Modules

- `@Subscribe` methods now should be package-private, not `public`;
- `@Apply` methods now should be `private`, not package-private;
- `@Assign` methods cannot return `Nothing` anymore. This feature was kept in Process Managers 
for backward compatibility. Now, we recommend that clients create domain-specific events even 
if they are not to be handled;
- many getter methods are renamed in order to remove the `get` and `is` prefixes. This code style 
will be propagated to the components which are not yet affected in the nearest future;
- `DefaultRepository` is introduced in order to avoid creating empty repository classes;
- Javadoc is revised and fixed.


#### API Changes in Non-Core Modules

- the new `ValidatingOptionFactory` SPI allows users to configure custom Protobuf validating options;
- `(when)` option is moved to `spine/time/time_options.proto`. It is now applicable to all `time` 
options which capture time, not only `google.protobuf.Timestamp`;
- `MethodFactory` allows to generate methods into specific Protobuf definitions. Generated methods 
are configured via the `modelCompiler.methods` Gradle config;
- `modelCompiler.interfaces` config allows to mark certain Protobuf definitions with a certain 
Java interface.

This version updates nearly all the dependency versions. <br> 
See `config/gradle/dependencies.gradle` for the details.
