---
title: Release Notes v1.2.0
headline: Release Notes
bodyclass: docs release-notes
layout: release-notes
sidenav: release-notes-side-nav.html
date: Nov 8, 2019
---

# Spine 1.2.0

## Base
This release includes several new features and some existing feature improvements for the library.

#### Notable changes:

- The [client](https://github.com/SpineEventEngine/dart) based on [Dart](https://dart.dev/) 
programming language is now available. The `base` is extended with Dart-related 
[tools]({{site.base_repo}}/tree/v1.2.0/tools/proto-dart-plugin).
- Several API improvements for precondition checks ([#486]({{site.base_repo}}/pull/486), 
[#487]({{site.base_repo}}/pull/487)).
- It is now allowed to disable the validating builders generation when using Spine Model 
Compiler ([#493]({{site.base_repo}}/pull/493)).
- A new `EntityState` marker interface is introduced for proto messages that represent a state 
of an entity ([#494]({{site.base_repo}}/pull/494)).

## Core Java
This release includes several new features and some API improvements for the library.

#### Notable changes:

- The [client](https://github.com/SpineEventEngine/dart) based on [Dart](https://dart.dev/) 
programming language is now available.
- The rules applied to handler methods are now strictly enforced. See [#1175]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1175)
- A new `(column)` option is introduced in place of an old column API ([#1184]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1184)).
- Several API extensions for the Delivery process ([#1182]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1182)).
- The entity state is now properly rolled back on rejections ([#1181]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1181)).
- An ability to create system request factories is added ([#1177]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1177)).
- Performance improvements for the `external` events dispatching ([#1180]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1180)).
- An `EmptyContext` placeholder is introduced to easier API for messages that do not require a context ([#1185]({{site.core_java_repo}}/pull/1185)).

## Web
A public release of the Spine Web library.

#### Notable changes:

- The [client](https://github.com/SpineEventEngine/dart) based on [Dart](https://dart.dev/) 
programming language is now available.
- The `order_by` query attribute is now supported in the JS client ([#121]({{site.web_repo}}/pull/121)).

## Google Cloud Java
This release brings a couple of API improvements to the library.

#### Notable changes:

- A new API for Datastore transactions is introduced, making them thread-safe ([#132]({{site.gcloud_java_repo}}/pull/132)).
- All Datastore-related test utilities are moved to a separate `testutil-gcloud` module ([#131]({{site.gcloud_java_repo}}/pull/131)).

<br>

**Bootstrap**, **JDBC Storage**, **Time** libraries’ 
artifacts were published as compatible with the Spine framework in version&nbsp;1.2.0.
