---
title: Release Notes v1.0.0
version: "1.0.0"
headline: Release Notes
bodyclass: docs release-notes
date: 2019-08-05
---

# Spine 1.0.0

## Base Libraries

This is the first public release of `base` modules.

#### Notable API changes:

- SLF4J logging is replaced by Flogger ([#451]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/451)).
- Protobuf messages generated with Spine plugins may now be built with validation by 
calling `.vBuild()` ([#409]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/409)). The generation of separate `...VBuilder` 
classes was removed.
- External libraries may now register custom validation options ([#408]({{% get-site-data "spine.base_libraries_repo" %}}/pull/408)).

## CoreJvm

This is the first public release of Spine core modules.

#### Most notable changes:

- `ServerEnvironment` is now responsible for the configuration of the server-wide routines, such 
as `StorageFactory`, `TransportFactory` and `Delivery`.
- System Bounded Context is now configurable — [#1115]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1115). It was 
simplified and made less intrusive — [#1084]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1084).
- Entities now receive messages via `Inbox`, which supports message sharding and de-duplication 
in a multi-node environment — [#1096]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1096).
- Trace API was introduced — [#1090]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1090).
- Errors during the message dispatching no longer throw exceptions. A series of system events 
was introduced instead — [#1104]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1104).
- `ConstraintViolated` system event was introduced — [#1081]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1081).
- `BoundedContext` configuration was simplified. Also, `BoundedContextBuilder` is now the only API 
to set up the context; all the duplicating API calls were removed from the `BoundedContext` 
itself — [#1108]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1108).
- It is now possible to `@Command` upon external events — [#1116]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1116). 
- `@Command` methods which accept events, may now ignore them — [#1114]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1114).
- `BlackBoxBoundedContext` API was extended with an ability to assert `Query` and `Subscription` 
behavior by using the corresponding test subjects — [#1124]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1124), 
[#1126]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1126).
- `BlackBoxBoundedContext` API is now the only way to test the applications built with Spine. 
The previous unit-testing framework was removed — [#1110]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1110).
- Entity `@Column` API marked as `@Experimental`, as we can still see a room for API improvement 
and further changes — [#1134]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1134).
- `IntegrationBus` behavior on handling new `BoundedContext`s was fixed — [#1120]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1120).
- Previously deprecated API was removed — [#1122]({{% get-site-data "spine.core_jvm_repo" %}}/pull/1122).

Also, we created a [chat on Discussions]({{% get-site-data "spine.socials.github_discussions" %}}) 
for answering the questions on the framework use. Please feel free to join and say hi!

## JDBC Storage

This is the first public release of Spine library supporting the JDBC-compliant storage engines.

## Google Cloud Java

This is the first public release of Spine libraries supporting the Google Cloud.
