---
title: Release Notes v1.8.2
headline: Release Notes
bodyclass: docs release-notes
layout: release-notes
sidenav: release-notes-side-nav.html
date: Jun 29, 2022
---

# Spine 1.8.2

## Core Java

This is a maintenance release of Spine core libraries. It extends the existing API, 
primarily focusing on adding new configuration knobs.

In particular, these changes were made since the last release:

* [#1443](https://github.com/SpineEventEngine/core-java/pull/1443): 
  Expand the `io.spine.server.Server` API to allow to:
  * obtain the Query, Subscription, and Command services after the `Server` is built;
  * add extra gRPC services to the same server.

* [#1448](https://github.com/SpineEventEngine/core-java/pull/1448): 
  Allow supplying `Executor` for `SystemWriteSide`.

* [#1454](https://github.com/SpineEventEngine/core-java/pull/1454): 
  Allow to configure the underlying gRPC server via `GrpcContainer` API.

No breaking changes to the existing API were made.

## Google Cloud Java

This release includes the migration to the latest Spine libraries in their `1.8.2` versions.

Also, the versions of Google Cloud client libraries were updated:

* Cloud Datastore is now at `2.8.0`;
* Cloud Pubsub V1 version is set to `1.101.1`;
* Cloud Trace version is updated to `2.2.0`.

## JDBC Storage

One notable change in this update is an ability to order and limit storage records properly,
when executing read-side queries. 

Previously, there were issues in some scenarios. 
See [this PR](https://github.com/SpineEventEngine/jdbc-storage/pull/162) for more details.

Also, the versions of dependencies were updated:

* HikariCP version is set to `4.0.3`, which is the latest available version compatible with Java 8;
* H2 is now used in its latest `2.1.214` version, eliminating the currently known vulnerabilities.

## Web

In this maintenance release, `web` module got the upgrades to the third-party JavaScript
dependencies in use.

## Dart

A major change in this update is the removal of the previous Firebase client implementation, 
which relied upon the recently discontinued 
[`firebase-dart` package](https://github.com/googlearchive/firebase-dart). 

From now on, users will be able to use the library of their choice 
by implementing the corresponding interface.

The rest of the library's public API remains intact.
