---
title: Release Notes v0.7.0
headline: Release Notes
bodyclass: docs release-notes
layout: release-notes
sidenav: release-notes-side-nav.html
date: Dec 30, 2016
---

# Spine 0.7.0

## Core Java

### New artifact IDs for Core Java modules

Gradle:

```proto
repositories {

   // Spine releases repository.
   maven { url = 'http://maven.teamdev.com/repository/spine' }

}

dependencies {

    compile 'org.spine3:spine-server-core:0.7.0'
    compile 'org.spine3:spine-client-core:0.7.0'

    compile 'org.spine3:spine-users:0.7.0'
    compile 'org.spine3:spine-values:0.7.0'

    testCompile 'org.spine3:spine-testutil-core:0.7.0'
}
```

### Handling changes and mismatches of values

This version introduces Protobuf types for describing field changes. Examples are `StringChange`, 
`TimestampChange`, `Int64Change`, etc. For more types, please see the `spine/change/change.proto` 
file.

These types are for being used in commands (to request a change) and events (to describe the 
change made).

The `ValueMismatch` type allows to fire a failure when an entity already had a value of a field, 
which differs from one described as a `previousValue` of corresponding change request. Please also 
see Java utility classes in the `org.spine3.change` package for details.

### Wildcard `(by)` option was introduced for enrichments

Now a single enrichment message can be used with multiple target events. E.g.

```proto
message EnrichmentForSeveralEvents {
     string username = 1 [(by) = "*.user_id"];
}

message EventOne {
     option (enrichment) = "EnrichmentForSeveralEvents";

     int32 user_id = 1;
}

message EventTwo {
     option (enrichment) = "EnrichmentForSeveralEvents";

     int32 user_id = 1;
}
```

### Behavioural changes and improvements

#### Automatic `ProjectionRepository` catch-up after `#initStorage`

As we discovered from the real-world cases, the catch-up for the `ProjectionRepository` is 
typically initiated right after the storage factory is set. E.g.

```proto
// Spine 0.6.0: 
repository.initStorage(storageFactory);
repository.catchUp()
```

Now the default behaviour is to invoke `#catchUp` automatically. So less code, less mistakes. E.g.

```proto
// Spine 0.7.0: 
repository.initStorage(storageFactory);
```

Of course, you can always turn off the automatic catch-up passing `false` to the 
`ProjectionRepository` constructor.

#### `ProcessManager changes`

`ProcessManager`s may now have no commands handled. So it is now possible to build the process 
on top of events only.

#### Syntax sugar for type names

Some sugar is now available to get the type name for a `Message`. E.g.

```proto
// Spine 0.6.0:
String name =  TypeUrl.of(msg).getTypeName();

// Spine 0.7.0.
String name = TypeName.of(msg);
```

### System and runtime improvements

#### `Aggregate` state double-checking upon update

Improvements were made to keep the Aggregate state consistent across different threads or even 
scaled instances of the application. Now Aggregate repository checks that no new events have 
arrived to the event storage since the start of the command processing.

In case any new events are detected, the processing of this command is repeated.

#### `CommandBus` configuration

`CommandBus` can now be configured to avoid spawning new threads during the bus operation. It is 
helpful for sensitive target runtimes such as Google AppEngine. E.g.

```proto
final CommandBus commandBus = CommandBus.newBuilder()
                                        // Allowed by default. Let's disable.
                                        .setThreadSpawnAllowed(false)
                                        .build();
```

#### Core singletons made thread-safe

`ConverterRegistry` and `DefaultStateRegistry` made thread-safe.

### Validation

#### `Goes` option introduced

Declarative validation rules for the Protobuf model were extended with `(goes)` option. It is now 
possible to declare a message field that can only be present if another field is present. E.g.

```proto
message ScheduledItem {
     ...
     spine.time.LocalDate date = 4;
     spine.time.LocalTime time = 5 [(goes).with = "date"];
}
```

#### `Required` option simplified

`(required)` Protobuf option has been simplified and is now a `bool` instead of a `RequiredOption` 
message. E.g.

```proto
// Spine 0.6.0:
MyMessage field = 1 [(required).value = true];

// Spine 0.7.0.
MyMessage field = 1 [(required) = true];
```

### Structural Changes:

- `CommandBus` made configurable via `CommandBus.Builder` instead of `CommandBus#newInstance`.

### General Improvements

- Date/Time API improvements.
- `Entity` version is now propagated to `Stand` upon an update. That allows to store the version 
properly in `StandStorage`.

### Dependency Updates

- Guava 20.0
- gRPC 1.0.2
- Protobuf 3.1.0

Spine is now integrated with Codacy, exposing the code quality metrics to everyone.
